in the 21st century political rhetoric
has led millions of people to think
about questions of personal integrity in
an overly abstract way alright question
of whether or not you have freedom of
speech you can't think about that in
your own life you can't think about it
in terms of the political commitments
and decisions you make individually in
the same way that you think of it on an
abstract level as it pertains to the
writing of a constitution that governs
millions of people we do make the
decision as individuals to give up or
limit our freedom of speech we do make
the decision to give up or limit our
sense of personal integrity we do make
the decision as individuals to
subordinate our own sense of personal
integrity to some other mandate mission
purpose or cause most commonly people
will sign a contract with an employer
there are high school history teachers
who go into work every day and these may
be people who passionately care about
history who research and read about
history in their own time and that's
what they did in university as
university students and they have to go
into work and teach a history course to
high school students where they know the
textbook is misleading dishonest false
and manipulative but they have made that
commitment where they have decided their
own a sense of personal integrity
matters less than the integrity of the
institution maybe it matters less than
the integrity of a government guideline
that defines the syllabus defines the
curriculum wherever it is that textbook
comes from they answer to an authority
that requires them it may or may not be
written explicitly in their contract it
requires them not to criticize the
textbook it requires them to teach
history to those students the way the
textbook is decided history is the way
some council or some government Minister
has decided history should be taught to
students
and they may know that it's bad and it's
wrong they may know that it's propaganda
right they've made that decision right
I haven't when I come here on YouTube I
really have my own sense of personal
integrity honesty dignity and what the
exercise of freedom of speech means to
me and as it happens I haven't sold out
to anyone okay
that doesn't mean it's inconceivable to
me that doesn't mean I would never
assign a contract with an employer to do
that as you know it's probably the most
examined case study or example there are
journalists who decide that their own
sense of personal integrity matters less
than serving the mission or mandate of
this newspaper of this TV station that
there's some editorial director who gets
to decide what the story is and then
their role as a journalist is to serve
that mission or mandate or purpose and
not to exercise their own freedom of
speech not to criticize it or point out
how wrong it is so on and so forth and
that subordination of your personal
integrity
it may not be limited to the hours when
you're in the office working for the
school as a high school teacher or when
you're in the office as a journalist or
working for the TV station I think it's
now commonplace for high school teachers
to be fired because of what they say on
social media if you're a high school
teacher who in the classroom says that
the history textbook is good and true
and accurate and then you come on
YouTube and you make your own YouTube
videos explaining everything that's
wrong with the textbook you you may well
be out of a job you may well be fired
they the school may say to you we expect
you to uphold the party line we expect
you to preach this 24/7 we expect you to
never break out of character we expect
you to play the role of the good teacher
who supports this curriculum who support
this institution and our mandate 24
hours a day seven days a week
certainly if you're a news presenter you
are you will be fired if you present one
version of reality when you're at work
delivering the news and then you go home
and have a YouTube channel where you
talk about everything that's
wrong with the news that way okay I've
seen this from many different angles
because I've lived a very peculiar life
I have seen the way in which the
snowball of uncritical mutual praise in
a context where everyone has sold out
and nobody has any personal integrity
nobody has any sense that they're gonna
tell the truth even if it's inconvenient
for them it's inconvenient institution
it's inconvenient or the authorities
think of you Furman I've seen the way
this becomes a dangerous snowball in
humanitarian work okay you can literally
have projects that were intended to
alleviate starvation projects that were
intended to feed the poor that end up
destroying the towns and villages of the
poor that end up driving them out of
their homes that end up in them starving
or being homeless
I know real examples of this more in
Laos than Cambodia but yeah I know about
projects that are disasters company and
how did this happen
fundamentally people are going to
meetings there University educated
people sitting there on participating
meetings and none of them are willing to
stand up and say this is a failure this
is a disaster all right I am not
exaggerating okay there were
humanitarian interventions that resulted
in the complete depopulation and
abandonment of the villages of for
people that the charitable agency was
allegedly trying to help feed clothe
alleviate their poverty all right so
poverty alleviation can go disastrously
wrong I'm not I could make a whole video
talking about that I'm not going to
address that I have seen the way the
snowball of mutually uncritical praise
rolls down the hill in the context of
academia in a discipline like
anthropology I have also seen it within
the very peculiar demi-monde
of Buddhism both the academic study of
Buddhism and Buddhism as a religion and
many of these people
unlike the high school teacher unlike
the journalists they maybe never signed
a contract they maybe never consciously
intentionally signed up and decided okay
my integrity matters less than this
mission mandated purpose many of them
just made a vague freeform commitment to
be flattering to
towards everyone all the time with the
hope that it would pay off in future
right now many people ask me why don't I
do the same in each of these contexts
people ask me why I didn't do this in um
you know why can't you just play the
game the way everyone else in the
humanitarian work sector is playing the
game I was asked I published articles
that deeply embarrassed corrupt and
immoral organizations for what they were
doing in the appearance sector I was big
scandal got into the European press not
just the Southeast Asian press and
someone there were there were major
scandals where I as a you could say I as
a journalist really broke the story I
did research that had a big impact on
very wealthy and powerful people in
Southeast Asia and I I did that for the
sake of the poor and downtrodden who
couldn't do what I did as a researcher
and journalist right I did that with a
real sense of moral purpose and I'm sure
I'm sure it made me unemployable in that
sector or at least you could say
unemployable by other people who have no
sense of personal integrity but of
course there were people in that sector
who saw what I was doing and admired it
and respected it and said wow this is a
guy who's doing real research he's doing
real things this is someone I they were
sure they're people who said I was
someone they admired um anyway I got I
got I was appreciated by the right
people and despised if you like despised
by the right people that's what happens
when you have personal integrity within
the world of Buddhist studies and
scholarship I know there were examples
of people who broke down weeping because
of the the criticism I offered their
their published work and it's partly
because they were not used to that that
whole field was just you know completely
uncritical mutual praise and here comes
the one guy in the field who's willing
to say no the author of this book there
was a major book on Buddhism in Cambodia
the author of the book can't read
Cambodian he has no ability in the
Cambodian language he can't read Pali
which is the ancient language relevant
to the situation the way Latin and
ancient Greek irrelevant to Europe
he can't read Cambodian he can't read
poly this guy apparently
had some knowledge of French and he
wrote this book is a complete outsider
an amateur with no expertise and no
local experience and I had more
expertise than him and I'm not the
world's greatest expert in Cambodia and
the book was full of outrageous
laughable errors the book was garbage
and there all these people who were part
of the you know snowball rolling
downhill of mutual praise and I'm the
one guy who's willing to stand up and
indeed write a book review you know
write articles and really talk about
know this book is bad and evil and wrong
and the author of that book never spoke
to me again and I think it's fair to say
in the tiny world because it's a tiny
world of English language scholarship on
Cambodia
you know nobody would nobody would talk
to me there's another whole story the
French language world of scholarship and
Cambodia they also wouldn't talk to me
because I was too harsh a critic of the
French Empire those people were still
Pro Empire and I was writing I was doing
research that really showed how bad and
evil the French Empire was so that was a
whole lot of different mind-blowing
contexts so here on YouTube right now
there are people who say to me in effect
who asked me why don't I sell out why
don't I subordinate my sense of personal
integrity to the purpose of being
flattering towards others with the
expectation that this will be good for
my career in future that's what almost
everyone else does not everybody but
that's what almost everyone else does
okay in any of these contexts whether
it's vegan activism making YouTube
videos Buddhist academia or even some
like signing up to join the military or
working as a journalist all these
contacts real-life and otherwise you
have to challenge yourself with this
counterfactual question if I did write a
flattering and dishonest book review and
we can use examples from here on YouTube
I made a book review of a book about
vegan politics by Casey Taft it's a very
harsh negative book review but I did the
research I read the book I quote the
book I have you know quoted text on
screen I have a carefully footnoted
analytical approach explaining to you
what's wrong with that
okay if your point is that I would be
better off today if instead I presented
uncritical positive praise for the book
the author of that book
Casey Taft he's a vegan activist he's
some kind of career academic I think he
has a PhD and he also owns a publishing
company and it publishes children's
books I have an interest in writing and
publishing children's books talked about
for many years so you could say
cynically that it would be in my
interest to sell out it would be in my
interest to praise and flatter this guy
the way everybody else does and you say
oh your book was wonderful your book was
so great in the hope that some positive
collaboration and cooperation commitment
so again keep in mind the high school
history teacher signs a contract and
gets paid he sells out explicitly
consciously intentionally other people
sleepwalk into situations where they're
selling out their integrity with no
contract with no payment it's just in
the hope that in future it's somehow
gonna pay off for them right instead of
a journalist who's now being employed by
a major news network think about a young
aspiring journalist who's just working
for free doing local community radio
maybe local public broadcasting on TV
and uploading articles to internet but
they already have the mentality of
selling out and praising everyone in the
hope that in future it's gonna lead to
that kind of employment certainly what
happens here on YouTube what happens in
Buddhist academia most of these people
never consciously entered into a
contract they sold out without anyone
ever paying the price without ever any
commitment being made to them they
decided that their personal integrity
matters less than something that's
merely hypothetical and possible in the
future that may never pay off this one
interesting okay there's a there's an
important counterfactual possibility
here right what if I offer sincere
criticism what if I do a book review
what if I write a book review or make a
book review video here on YouTube it's
the same either way what if I write that
poker
and then the author I'm criticizing he
responds positively he respects me for
the work I did he recognizes that this
is meaningful incisive analytical
criticism he recognizes this observe and
then we're friends on that basis you
have to recognize the possibility of
that no matter how rare and then in that
context as soon as you have that
possibility in mind you have to ask
yourself would I want to be friends with
this person would I want to be
colleagues with this person on the basis
of a lie on the basis of flattery
deception and manipulation because if I
write a book review where I'm saying
this is a great and wonderful book when
I know it's not where I'm covering up
the errors the inadequacies thought if
I'm doing that and then this person says
wow that was a great book review thank
you so much for promoting me in my
career or whatever whatever the
situation is right even if a friendship
results in that even if cooperation or
collaboration results with that that's
an outcome I don't want because then I
am in the position of being the liar and
the manipulator right I am not just
destroying my own integrity I'm actually
destroying the other person's integrity
I'm destroying the integrity of the
system as a whole I'm destroying the
integrity of the larger project that
were a part of as a whole whether you
think of that project as being
journalism you know the investigation
and reporting on political affairs
whether that project is humanitarian
work in a third world country whether
that project is vegan activism or
whether that project is just making
YouTube videos for us to sit down
reflect on the meaning of our lives try
to gather together our thoughts and
intentions and resolve on how to be
better people tomorrow